README.md, before:

# openshift-aws-setup

## Overview

This is an Ansible auotmation playbook that provisions a small OpenShift environment (1 master, x app nodes) that is suitable for demos, POCs and small workshops. The playbook can deploy either Origin or Container Platform.

AWS related configuration can be customised by modifying ```vars/aws-config.yaml```. Note that the number of application nodes is configurable, the default is 3.

## Prerequisites

 - Ansible 2.4.2 or later is required
 - AWS credentials: access key & secret --> http://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/managing-aws-access-keys.html
 - Ansible installed --> http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/intro_installation.html
 - Route 53 Public Hosted Zone. The playbook use Route53 for private and public DNS and routes. While the playbook automatically creates everything for the private DNS hosted zone and routes, it is expected that you have a public hosted zone in Route 53 that matches whatever you are using for the public DNS.
 - By default a single admin user is created called ```admin``` that can be used to login into the web console. The password for the user is in the ```vars/aws-config.yml``` vars file. __PLEASE CHANGE THE PASSWORD TO SOMETHING UNIQUE!__. Other users can be added to this file as well.
 - An AWS keypair must be generated and the reference in ```vars/aws-config.yml``` must be updated to reference it (Currently referencing mykeypair).
 - You must update the ```~/.ssh/config``` file to include your keypair so the playbook can access the VMs in AWS. To do this, include the following line in you config file:

 ```
 IdentityFile ~/.ssh/mykeypair.pem
 ```

Where ```mykeypair``` is the name of your keypair. Obviously you need to have a copy of mykeypair.pem in the .ssh directory as well in order for it to be used.

## Ansible Compatibility

Note that some specific versions of Ansible will not work due to bugs, here is a list of the ones I am aware of:

* 2.4.1 - https://github.com/ansible/ansible/issues/31905
* 2.5.1 - https://github.com/ansible/ansible/issues/39234

## Container Native Storage (CNS) Gluster

The playbook can optionally install CNS storage (gluster) as the default persistent storage provider for application storage. This will provision CNS on the first three application nodes. To use this feature, set the ```install_gluster``` to true and configure other parameters as required.

When installing gluster, make sure the volume size is big enough to host metrics and logging volumes + 20% or so.

## Metrics, Logging and Prometheus (3.7+)

The playbook can optionally install metrics, logging or prometheus (on 3.7+ only). To do so, change ```install_metrics```, ```install_logging``` and ```install_prometheus``` to true.

## OpenShift Inventory

The OpenShift inventory can be customized by modifying ```roles/openshift-install/files/openshift_inventory.cfg``` if you want to have more advanced control over certain features.

## Master and User Pods

By default, the master will not host user pods, just infra pods. If you want the master to host user pods, change ```install_node_selector``` to false in ```vars/aws-config.yml```. Note that if you also install gluster, this will cause the gluster nodes to host user pods as well.

_Note:_ You may want to set ```install_node_selector``` to false when you install gluster as there was an existing bug with the gluster install that causes the gluster pods to fail to be scheduled when this is enabled. This could also be corrected by updating the ```roles/openshift-install/files/openshift_inventory.cfg``` file to add the primary region to gluster.

## SSL

This playbook can optionally use [letsencrypt](https://letsencrypt.org) to create and install SSL certificates for the master and router. To use this
feature, change the ```use_lets_encrypt``` flag in the variables from false to true. Also make sure to set your email address as this is what lets encrypt will use to communicate with you.

Note that lets encrypt as a rate limit for creating certificates of 20 requests a week. To minimize requests to lets encrypt, the playbook will download the certifications locally to where it is running to back them up. You can then set ```use_lets_encrypt``` to false and set the various SSL certificate variables to re-use the cached certificates.

The steps the playbook uses was taken from this [article](https://www.redpill-linpro.com/sysadvent/2017/12/15/letsencrypt-on-openshift.html), well worth reviewing if you want to understand the process. The one difference is that the playbook uses certbot in standalone mode rather then HAProxy to generate the certificate.

## Run

You need to export your AWS credentials prior to running:

```
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>
```

For OpenShift Origin, the command ```./openshift-playbook-run.sh``` will execute the Ansible playbook
with a set of roles which will provision AWS infrastructure and install Openshift on top of that.

Installing OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) requires a Red Hat subscription and you must either provide your Red Hat credentials
and the name of the pool to use to the script or a Red Hat organization and activation id.

```
./openshift-playbook-run.sh -e rhsm_username=me@something.com -e rhsm_password=mypassword -e rhsm_pool="sas876sa8sa76sjk..."
```
or
```
./openshift-playbook-run.sh -e rhsm_key_id=xxxxx -e rhsm_org_id=xxxxx"
```
Note the above is just an example, please update all variables including the pool name which is correct for your situation.

## Network Topology

![Network Diagram](./docs/network-topology-openshift.jpg)

A private VPC and DNS is used, OpenShift is installed using the private IP addresses. This means the IP addresses never change, unlike EC2 public addresses, and the environment can be stopped and started as needed.
install_node_selector
A bastion is created as part of the installation, however once the installation is complete it is no longer needed and may be stopped or terminated. Note that it can be handy to keep the bastion around in a stopped state in case you want to manually re-run the installation again.

## Troubleshooting

If the OpenShift installation fails at task ```run openshift installation script```, you can ssh to the bastion and review the ```openshift-install.log``` file to see what issue occurred.

Cockpit is available on port 9090 so you can access it using the same URL as the master but change 8443 to 9090. If you set an OpenShift admin user Cockpit will be configured to use the same username/password.

## References

 - https://www.codeproject.com/Articles/1168687/Get-up-and-running-with-OpenShift-on-AWS
 - https://docs.openshift.org/latest/welcome/index.html

Commit message:

Added verification step to SSH config setup step(s)

README.md, after:

# openshift-aws-setup

## Overview

This is an Ansible auotmation playbook that provisions a small OpenShift environment (1 master, x app nodes) that is suitable for demos, POCs and small workshops. The playbook can deploy either Origin or Container Platform.

AWS related configuration can be customised by modifying ```vars/aws-config.yaml```. Note that the number of application nodes is configurable, the default is 3.

## Prerequisites

 - Ansible 2.4.2 or later is required
 - AWS credentials: access key & secret --> http://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/managing-aws-access-keys.html
 - Ansible installed --> http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/intro_installation.html
 - Route 53 Public Hosted Zone. The playbook use Route53 for private and public DNS and routes. While the playbook automatically creates everything for the private DNS hosted zone and routes, it is expected that you have a public hosted zone in Route 53 that matches whatever you are using for the public DNS.
 - By default a single admin user is created called ```admin``` that can be used to login into the web console. The password for the user is in the ```vars/aws-config.yml``` vars file. __PLEASE CHANGE THE PASSWORD TO SOMETHING UNIQUE!__. Other users can be added to this file as well.
 - An AWS keypair must be generated and the reference in ```vars/aws-config.yml``` must be updated to reference it (Currently referencing mykeypair).
 - You must update the ```~/.ssh/config``` file to include your keypair so the playbook can access the VMs in AWS. To do this, include the following line in you config file:

 ```
 IdentityFile ~/.ssh/mykeypair.pem
 ```

Where ```mykeypair``` is the name of your keypair. Obviously you need to have a copy of mykeypair.pem in the .ssh directory as well in order for it to be used.

Also, you need to have read+write for user only permissions set on `~/.ssh/config`, like so:

 ```
 chmod 600 ~/.ssh/config
 ```

Otherwise you'll encounter 'bad owner or permissions on ssh/config' error message.

## Ansible Compatibility

Note that some specific versions of Ansible will not work due to bugs, here is a list of the ones I am aware of:

* 2.4.1 - https://github.com/ansible/ansible/issues/31905
* 2.5.1 - https://github.com/ansible/ansible/issues/39234

## Container Native Storage (CNS) Gluster

The playbook can optionally install CNS storage (gluster) as the default persistent storage provider for application storage. This will provision CNS on the first three application nodes. To use this feature, set the ```install_gluster``` to true and configure other parameters as required.

When installing gluster, make sure the volume size is big enough to host metrics and logging volumes + 20% or so.

## Metrics, Logging and Prometheus (3.7+)

The playbook can optionally install metrics, logging or prometheus (on 3.7+ only). To do so, change ```install_metrics```, ```install_logging``` and ```install_prometheus``` to true.

## OpenShift Inventory

The OpenShift inventory can be customized by modifying ```roles/openshift-install/files/openshift_inventory.cfg``` if you want to have more advanced control over certain features.

## Master and User Pods

By default, the master will not host user pods, just infra pods. If you want the master to host user pods, change ```install_node_selector``` to false in ```vars/aws-config.yml```. Note that if you also install gluster, this will cause the gluster nodes to host user pods as well.

_Note:_ You may want to set ```install_node_selector``` to false when you install gluster as there was an existing bug with the gluster install that causes the gluster pods to fail to be scheduled when this is enabled. This could also be corrected by updating the ```roles/openshift-install/files/openshift_inventory.cfg``` file to add the primary region to gluster.

## SSL

This playbook can optionally use [letsencrypt](https://letsencrypt.org) to create and install SSL certificates for the master and router. To use this
feature, change the ```use_lets_encrypt``` flag in the variables from false to true. Also make sure to set your email address as this is what lets encrypt will use to communicate with you.

Note that lets encrypt as a rate limit for creating certificates of 20 requests a week. To minimize requests to lets encrypt, the playbook will download the certifications locally to where it is running to back them up. You can then set ```use_lets_encrypt``` to false and set the various SSL certificate variables to re-use the cached certificates.

The steps the playbook uses was taken from this [article](https://www.redpill-linpro.com/sysadvent/2017/12/15/letsencrypt-on-openshift.html), well worth reviewing if you want to understand the process. The one difference is that the playbook uses certbot in standalone mode rather then HAProxy to generate the certificate.

## Run

You need to export your AWS credentials prior to running:

```
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID>
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>
```

For OpenShift Origin, the command ```./openshift-playbook-run.sh``` will execute the Ansible playbook
with a set of roles which will provision AWS infrastructure and install Openshift on top of that.

Installing OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) requires a Red Hat subscription and you must either provide your Red Hat credentials
and the name of the pool to use to the script or a Red Hat organization and activation id.

```
./openshift-playbook-run.sh -e rhsm_username=me@something.com -e rhsm_password=mypassword -e rhsm_pool="sas876sa8sa76sjk..."
```
or
```
./openshift-playbook-run.sh -e rhsm_key_id=xxxxx -e rhsm_org_id=xxxxx"
```
Note the above is just an example, please update all variables including the pool name which is correct for your situation.

## Network Topology

![Network Diagram](./docs/network-topology-openshift.jpg)

A private VPC and DNS is used, OpenShift is installed using the private IP addresses. This means the IP addresses never change, unlike EC2 public addresses, and the environment can be stopped and started as needed.
install_node_selector
A bastion is created as part of the installation, however once the installation is complete it is no longer needed and may be stopped or terminated. Note that it can be handy to keep the bastion around in a stopped state in case you want to manually re-run the installation again.

## Troubleshooting

If the OpenShift installation fails at task ```run openshift installation script```, you can ssh to the bastion and review the ```openshift-install.log``` file to see what issue occurred.

Cockpit is available on port 9090 so you can access it using the same URL as the master but change 8443 to 9090. If you set an OpenShift admin user Cockpit will be configured to use the same username/password.

## References

 - https://www.codeproject.com/Articles/1168687/Get-up-and-running-with-OpenShift-on-AWS
 - https://docs.openshift.org/latest/welcome/index.html
